Now or Never: Getting Serious about Free Software in Government
###############################################################
:date: 2012-11-27 14:45
:tags: floss, free software, government, linux
:slug: free-software-gov

News came out yesterday that the City of Munich in Germany `has saved big while moving to Linux`_. The City migrated 11,000 users from Windows 2000 to a custom Linux distribution for €22.8 million, which also included a full switch from Microsoft Office to OpenOffice. The projected costs of a migration to Windows 7 and Microsoft Office for the city ran to €34 million, giving the government a tidy savings of €11 million. The migration will continue to more systems running proprietary software over the course of the next few years. For a relatively modest-sized city of nearly 1.4 million people, this savings is nothing to shake a stick at, and Munich has done a great job in taking the lead on such an ambitious project. It is of critical importance that governments - both national and municipal - be urged to consider making similar switches as soon as possible. This is not just important for controlling public expenses, but also for the important changes taking place in how our technology and data are managed.

There are many perspectives for why such a shift must be accelerated and given a new focus. First, our economies are not growing, and neither are our budgets. We are told we must cut back and make a sacrifice on a daily basis, and that governments around the world are taking the lead in this effort to "trim the fat." However the vast majority of these governments have been unmoved by the many financial benefits that free and open source software can provide. `A recent survey`_ by a technology group in Ottawa estimated that the Canadian government could save more than $1 billion per year on licensing and deployment costs, as well as by improving the way in which departmental IT systems are managed and consolidated. The United Kingdom spends about £20 billion on information technology work every year, 80% of which is handled by five major (proprietary) corporations. There is no doubt that this figure could be substantially reduced by the implementation of open source and free software in government departments, something that the UK government is `actively working on`_.

Another reason why shifts to open source and free software must occur as soon as possible lies in the closing of the major software ecosystems and the challenges that will present for technology in the future. With the development and eager launch of the various platforms of Windows 8, Microsoft has given a clear indication that it intends to follow Apple’s lead when it comes to software and device consolidation. Concretely, this means that the various proprietary platforms arising today do not prioritize user choice and interoperability between different platforms. Instead, they focus on the "experience" that surrounds a particular product, in an attempt to improve its commodity and aesthetic value. This may be good for certain consumers who care little for their security, privacy or data independence, but it is terrible news for governments and large organizations alike. Computing for official business is now and has always been about functionality and accessibility, so making desktops "work like tablets" is bad news for many organizations. Not to mention the millions in training costs that these changes will require every time Microsoft wants to make a revision. When you compare these issues to the clear benefits that open source software brings `when it comes to platform and project development`_, its frankly somewhat appalling that governments would even consider entering Microsoft's walled gardens.

The primary obstacle facing open source software initiatives in government continues to be the perception that accompanies it. As Windows-based desktop platforms continue to hold the vast majority of the world’s desktop market share at a staggering 92%, most government employees are content with using systems that they are familiar with using at home. The perception of Linux and free software continues to take a hit when it comes to matters such as security, ease-of-use and ease of implementation.

Despite these setbacks, Linux (and open source software in general) has been advancing demonstrably in recent years. The increased use of Linux as a dedicated and reliable server platform has not only improved its image but has also made it more secure as a result. Furthermore the growing popularity of Ubuntu as a Linux distribution, as well as the widespread use of Android as a secondary platform on phones/tablets to be used apart from Microsoft’s proprietary platforms is helping break the general public out of the "Microsoft or bust" mentality. With these successes the open source community is helping to slowly chip away at its negative image, much of which was initially fostered by its largest competitor, Microsoft. And with this "chipping away" there has also been big movement on the parts of governments. `The UK government has recently gotten serious with its open source initiatives`_, and Iceland is `implementing their own open source software plan`_.

With the renewed scrutiny on national budgets and the surprising pushes by companies like Microsoft to further wall off their IT environments, we can only hope that the "third way" of open source and free software will hit the tipping point in government applications.

.. _has saved big while moving to Linux: http://www.itworld.com/operating-systems/321474/switching-linux-saves-munich-over-11-million?page=0,0
.. _A recent survey: http://www.itworldcanada.com/news/open-source-in-government-can-save-billions-group/145377
.. _actively working on: http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/european-technology/open-source-software-what-is-holding-back-adoption-by-government/130
.. _when it comes to platform and project development: http://www.techrepublic.com/blog/european-technology/how-open-source-software-can-head-off-it-disasters/705
.. _The UK government has recently gotten serious with its open source initiatives: http://opensource.com/law/12/11/UK-government-finalizes-open-standards-principles
.. _implementing their own open source software plan: http://www.linuxinsider.com/rsstory/74715.html