The Reification of Contact and the Cult of the iPad
###################################################
:date: 2012-04-03 14:45
:tags: politics, philosophy, capitalism, marxism, culture
:slug: reification-cult

Yet as everything else crumbles around it, the inexorable march of capitalism soldiers on, doing the only thing it knows how to do. As modern life was dominated in the twentieth century by the factory and industrial economy, the twenty-first century has become subject to the computer and its "information" economy. Data is now bought and sold as a commodity. Children in the 1870s might have saved up their weekly allowances to purchase candy or dolls manufactured in a factory with traditional means; now we have progressed to the true commodity of this age: the "Pro Version." Whether it’s for a new level in the Angry Birds game we play on our smartphones, or to unlock new and helpful features in our favourite calendar application, the Pro Version – i.e. the non-free App, the invisible and intangible commodity of "intellectual property" – is the commodity of the digital age. Of course, commodification at this level is not new, and while we might scoff at how useless paying ninety-nine cents is for an extra level of that time-wasting game on our phone, is it really any different than a child purchasing a ball-and-paddle in the 1800s?

Yet as history progresses the leisure time of the average person is increasingly commodified. We are begged to spend more time on Facebook, to set up a LinkedIn account, to talk with our friends on Skype. The one-time transaction of purchasing a soccer ball to play with in the field is not nearly as tantalizing as having a "consumer" of information, someone who will generate an incalculable amount of ad revenue over the course of their lifetime. This is the difference that can be drawn with common payment for diversion: even the act of sitting on the couch with Facebook open on a laptop nearby is generating many micro-transactions between mega-corporations on our behalf. Let’s attempt to follow this journey: first, you, the unsuspecting individual, only wanting to have closer contact with your friends and loved ones, send your personal information into Facebook’s servers. Next, an ad is shown on-screen for that hot new 3D movie coming out, a privilege for which the movie studio sends a small amount to Facebook via a third party. But how does Facebook know that you like 3D movies, you ask? Well, because you said so, in your "favourite movies" section. Facebook personalizes its advertisements to those who would be most interested, gaining the most value for its advertisers. If you end up on someone’s Facebook profile via a Google search, or if you find a business there through Yelp, we can begin a whole new process of purchases, transactions, contracts and shared information, all on your behalf. Everyone has a stake in your wasted time on the Internet. How many hours do we spend per week on the Internet, unknowingly prompting these constant micro-transactions and perpetuating the activity of capitalism’s Spectacle without end?

Furthermore, while the commodification of communication and leisure is not new (the advent of paid telephone service comes to mind), what is new is the extent to which these new online services are creeping into our life, and the extent to which the system of capitalism and the phenomenon of the Spectacle are intertwined in this new twenty-first century digital culture. As the external metropolis in which we live has been fully transformed into a social and visual representation of capitalism’s social forces, so it becomes that, in our free time, we are relegated to this "virtual metropolis" of the Internet. "Everything that was directly lived has receded into a representation," as Debord tells us [1]_. With Facebook, we receive the representation of human contact and healthy communication as capitalism would render it, devoid of most real meaning and peppered with Spectacular "images" and advertisements. To support the constant need for consumers of information in this way, communication becomes reified [2]_. It is unthinkable to remove oneself from this fake "virtual" contact, which somehow appropriates the attributes of real and meaningful interaction with loved ones and replaces them with what we receive on Facebook, like uninsightful comment-blurbs on your latest inebriated self-portrait. Yet one’s membership on Facebook is expected, lest you lose this "intimate contact" with your family members and miss one small potential chance at happiness!

As the West continues to embrace this new-found "information economy," we find more evidence of capitalism’s cruelty in the form of the Apple Corporation. The standard model of exploitation, production and commodification is found in the iPad. The fact that this device is but a small touch-screen computer is lost to most of its users: it has become the penultimate commodity. The charisma of the Apple Corporation under its late founder Steve Jobs has given its products cult status, not only among technology enthusiasts but also among laymen. If you ask someone on the street what the Apple Corporation represents, they will tell you: high-quality products, good for the environment, and a caring corporate culture. Yet the iPad, and its older cousin, the iPhone, is behind the most wanton expressions of consumerism our society has seen in decades. One new device is released, drawing millions in sales, and the next one is released only a year or so later, again drawing more millions in sales. And what do we find behind this feverish consumerism, wrapped in Apple’s mystique of "ethical capitalism?" The same exploitation as always: crushing labour conditions at Apple’s manufacturing centres in China and Taiwan, and the rapid use of resources to try and keep up with a product lifecycle that renews itself after only about a year and a half. People don’t just buy these products as status symbols; they are purchased for their Facebook apps, for Angry Birds, and for every other piece of intellectual property sold to them by the new Western economy. This is the link between the "information" economy and the productive one: both are hideously grotesque, but wrapped in Spectacular adoration and praise. Both are fetishized for their "communicative" abilities, and the possibility of bringing the capitalist metropolis/aesthetic to even more niches of one’s existence. So while the West can no longer directly compete with the globalized economic monster they have created, they have teamed up in some senses, scheming to drive the masses ever further into debt and despair while selling them the newest useless "entertainments, spectacles, happenings, and distractions." [3]_

.. [1] Guy Debord, La societé du spectacle [The Society of the Spectacle] (London: Rebel Press, 2004), 5.

.. [2] We can say now that communication itself has acquired "a new objectivity, a new substantiality…which destroys [its] original and authentic substantiality." Georg Lukács, History and Class Consciousness (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1972), 92.

.. [3] David Harvey, The Condition of Postmodernity, (Cambridge: Blackwell, 1990), 285.
